hello my name is David Emery and it is
my privilege to be interviewing dr.
Michael Parenti along with his colleague
Peggy Newton the author of a very
important article from covert action
quarterly number fifty-four that article
is entitled the wonderful life and
strange death of Walter Reuther Michael
welcome to our lives
hello David I am okay good Oh Walter
Reuther is a name very well known to
people familiar with labor history of
the United States very name very
familiar to people familiar with the
history of progressive politics in this
country but not a name that is probably
known to a great many Americans in the
year of our Lord 1996 Michael why don't
you begin by explaining a little bit to
us about who Walter Reuther was what his
significance was for American society
and why someone may have wanted him out
of the way well he was probably one of
the most progressive labor union leaders
that the United States has ever produced
he also was a man of tremendous
intelligence resourcefulness and
incorruptible and he built he helped
build and he became president of the
largest union in the western industrial
world and that was the United Auto
Workers and and this went on from 1930s
and into the 40s and 50s and right into
in fact the 1960s when he when he was he
when he was killed in an auto crash I'm
sorry in a plane crash
a private plane his uh as you pointed
out he not only was involved in building
a very large and a powerful labor union
obviously not something that's going to
be pleasing to the powers that be we'll
get into that in a second but he also
used that power on behalf of a great
many other causes such as civil rights
anti-militarism anti-imperialism could
you tell us a little bit about some of
the specifics of his uh yeah his eyes
activism outside of Union yeah Ruth was
hated by the auto bosses because of his
labor militancy
his dedication to the workers he wasn't
a union leader who could be bought off
he was one who fought for their
interests and this is enough to hate him
and this got the Ford Motor Company
thugs beat him up once and there was an
attempt on his life and J Edgar Hoover
stalked him for the better part of 35
years or more and tried to block
appointments that he was going to be
given to federal commissions and
committees things like that but in
addition to that Walter Reuther also had
a larger social agenda
let me quote him and I got this in the
articles very brief he said the labor
movement is about changing society
what good is $1 an hour more in wages if
your neighbor is burn if your
neighborhood is burning down what good
is another week vacation if the lake you
used to go to where you've got a cottage
is polluted and you can't swim in it and
the kids can't play in it
what good is another 100 dollar pension
if the world goes up in atomic smoke so
Reuther was that kind of labor leader
who really discomforted the higher
circles whose job it is to keep America
safe for the fortune 500 and keep the
world safe for global capitalism I mean
he was militant and he had not only a
dedication to the rank-and-file and
union issues but a broader class of
gender he fought for racial equality he
fought for environmental safety he
fought against militaristic
interventions by the u.s. he fought
against thee he fought against the
nuclear arms race and was a critic of US
policy at constant escalation of
military budget and nuclear arsenal and
he also condemned and came out against
the Vietnam War he was critical and his
brother Victor even more so critical of
the CIA and the CIA's role in using a
field is using AFL front unions down in
Latin America to to set up these these
puppets CIA finance unions which would
undermine them will know it
and left unions that existed a field by
the way is an acronym for the American
Institute of free labor development
which is actually oxymoronic because it
was exactly precisely by the way philip
ages the company inside the company a
CIA diary goes into a field at
considerable length you mentioned that
he was very active in particular against
the Vietnam War and that he through the
considerable power of his Union behind
the civil rights movement in the early
1960s right
uh we are and then he also because he
had such differences with George Meany
when the United Auto Workers was part of
the afl-cio and Phil green and these
other people these guys were all right
wingers and and hardliners on the Cold
War and they're the only ones that would
get you know funneled up into positions
of dominance and well he you know
because they had these differences he
broke with the afl-cio and mid-60s and
he formed the ala the American labor
alliance with the Teamsters and and a
couple of smaller unions they had you
know I had him it was a good size was a
good sized organization I forget now
membership when I got it in the article
there but um the point is that it gave
him a freer hand
he really really came out and started
talking against the US intervention is
in Alaska thank you uh when he died
we're going to get to the circumstances
surrounding his death both politically
and forensic Lee in a few minutes Oh
Walter Reuther is life along with that
of his brother and colleague and UAW
activities Victor had been through not
only threatened but had been had
suffered attacks on it almost throughout
the course of his political and labor
history you mentioned in your article
but after being fired from the Ford
Motor Company for union activities he
spent three years touring the world
including working at an automobile plant
in the Soviet Union and he wrote a
letter home encouraging people to say to
carry on the fight which the FBI then
deliberately forged into saying carry on
the fight for a Soviet America and as
you point out right it was his brother
Victor who wrote the letter
and his brother signed it you know well
wall and Vick and/or vacant wall and so
that letter was in write circulated by
Hoover even though they had the original
copy the doctored version was circulated
to members of Congress to presidents of
the United States whenever they thought
of wanting to appoint Ruth it to some
kind of blue-ribbon Commission you know
to do something or look at something in
every case of Hoover was able to to
block appointment for Walter Reuther uh
the course of his activities as a UAW
organizer was interrupted by a number of
violent incidents two of them at least
and possibly more involving a people
from the so-called Ford personnel
service you discussed that in May 1937
he and some UAW colleagues were badly
beaten up by some of those thugs and
then in 1938 a couple of the goons
forced their way into his home tried to
abduct him and it turned out that they
had been working for a fellow named
Harry Bennett who was Ford's security
chief oh and yet neither law enforcement
nor the jury in the case of the
attempted abduction would do anything
about it and that's correct that was
very lackadaisical prosecution of the
thugs and so nothing was done about it
and and Harry Bennett as I said I think
was it was a buddy a golfing buddy of J
Edgar Hoover Harry Bennett was a thug he
used to take hardened criminals out of
jails and put him to work as Ford
security
by the way their job was to beat up
union organizers including beating up
Walter Reuther as you mentioned and and
then it also fed J Edgar Hoover dossiers
on union organizers and labor people
mostly you know about their left dish or
communist affiliations so there was this
whole kind of you know iron triangle
between between the criminal element the
corporate bosses and the national
security state all of them working
together to stop a progressive leader in
that context we should perhaps remember
that Henry Ford for whom Harry Bennett
worth was one of a Dolf Hitler's early
as two most prominent financial backers
as George Saudis points out in his
landmark work Harry Bennett was able to
employ these criminals for the Ford
personnel service because he was the
head of the Michigan State Parole Board
and he would then parole out many of the
nastiest criminals in the state of
Michigan who would apply their trade on
behalf of the Ford personnel service all
right well that I didn't have that in
the article and I wasn't even aware that
maybe I did know that but I know it's
very interesting I know he had Poe I
thought he had links with people in the
Perot but but that may be so and his
word was these these prisoners you do
what I tell you or you go back to prison
yeah I have to check out soon though
this was a kind of a you know is it kind
of almost a blackmail thuggery there you
blackmail people into the service of
violence and reaction ISM yeah in fact
in fascism that's facilities work that
discusses that I'd have to go back and
check but I'm pretty sure he was head of
it maybe he was just on the parole board
but that's how he was able to get these
people to work for him you mentioned
that even add that after the attempted
abduction Walter Reuther was shotgunned
and badly wounded yet still the police
did nothing about it
about ten years later right he was shot
and while sitting in his home through
the window bullet came left his his arm
never recovered the full use of an arm
and a hand and and and not long after
the bail the next year as a mom was and
victor ruth who believes to this day was
a message for Walter
but Vick
was shot too he was shot in the head and
and a bullet came in took off a piece of
his jaw and and and took out one of his
eyes and Victor's still alive today
works but he had lived all his life with
this this terrible wound and and then
the Senate in an unprecedented move
because of such an outcry at the time
passed resolution asking or directing
the Justice Department to investigate
these two murder attempts and Hoover
refused to move on him he just didn't
wouldn't do it he said no federal laws
been violated in fact a whole host of
federal laws the fugitive law possible
kidnapping a possible crossing a state
lines
whatever has conspiracy but he just
didn't and of course how would he know
no federal law has been violated if he
didn't even initiate an investigation so
you had that kind of a thing going on
the UAW did his own investigation and
and got all sorts of leads and directed
them right back to Harry Bennett right
back to mob and right back to maybe some
law people too and and these leaves were
sat on by the FBI and the FBI went
looked at false leaves and took them in
and and just simply did what they could
to sabotage or stonewall the
investigation that UAW investigators won
UAW investigator on the case met a very
suspicious and mysterious death when he
was out fishing he'd come up with a lot
of stuff this was a fella named Ralph
Winstead right was Healy witness who had
been had provided the police with some
eyewitness identification of a suspect
in the shooting of Victor know the that
witness was just a a neighbor of
Victor's who the shooting of Victor was
very suspicious are you going to be
reading the article did you say yes I
will read this I'll go into too many
details people will get it but the
shooting was very suspicious
and uh a neighbor gave a description and
the police told him to shut up
they all got he got anonymous calls
telling him to shut up and he got it was
so intimidating oh he finally moved to
Florida or something like that
yeah but when the the article will not
be read on other stations that carry
this interview I am gonna read it on my
home state I think but it we should note
that this particular incident again
incident against Victor involved the
apparent removal of his dog which was a
watch sight and that involved police
collaboration the police came repeatedly
and told Victor that his dog was
disturbing the neighbors Victor asked
what neighbors I'd be happy to talk to
him I saw it and in fact the dog had
barked a few nights rather briefly a dog
relly barked and each time Victor went
down to investigate and there was a car
parked in front of the house and then it
sped away and finally they said you do
something about that dog they got
amazingly insistent about it and Victor
reluctantly gave the dog away and the
very next night is when he was shot he
also had canvassed all the neighbors
around and not one of them complained
and said no we never even heard the dog
mail and and then as I say one of the
neighbors who did give a description of
the assailant was was intimidated into
silence and actually left the air the
area we might note that J Edgar Hoover
in in refusing to follow up on the
attacks on Walter Reuther defied the
wishes and orders of the United States
Attorney General at the time Tom Clark
the father of Ramsey Clark who later
followed in into the Office of Attorney
General correct oh we should perhaps
note to hear as we analyze Walter
Reuther what he did and why he had run
afoul of the powers that be he had also
been requisitioned along with joseph rao
an attorney for UAW am i pronouncing
that right ra u H yeah I think ain't
finances around to investigate radical
right-wing activities on the part of the
Kennedy administration yet on behalf of
the Kennedy administration right
and they Victor Walter and Joe round did
say that there was right-wing activity
in the US military
and and that there were these hate
groups and that these should be somehow
stopped Victor also you know played a
role in the purging of the AFL's
of the CIO of left communist organize
unions unfortunate I mean Walter did and
that's unfortunate
Walter was read baited mercilessly
throughout his career and he thought
that by red-baiting in return by dumping
on the communists that this would
somehow establish his credibility it
never did that and it did very it did
very little to that effect all it did
was weaken the CIO and an AFL fail and
it oh and as they was just the CIO at
that time and deprived them of millions
of union members and and cut out the
more militant and some of the best
organized and most honestly run reunions
or just kicked out because of the red
baiting unfortunately Walter fell prey
to that sort of thing which to this day
is still done on the left by many people
who have to show a bitter ferocious
anti-communism anti-soviet ISM anti
existing Cummins whatever - supposedly
retain their credibility not realizing
that the people on the right hate you
whether you're a communist or or or a
progressive or socialist or an anti
communist leftist or an anti-communist
trade unions - still hate you because
you make moves against their interests
they use the communism to bait and get
popular hysteria mobilized but but
communism is not the issue it's the
question of class interest exactly
exactly I personally do not hold a brief
for quote because communism is really a
non-existent term not even Marx
everybody that was supposed to be the
last stage of things oh I did never
labrie for example for the Soviet Union
or the other socialist states at the
same time they were never the demons we
were told they were and I can vouch that
uh not supporting that kind of system
gains you know no ground at all in this
country politically speaking you'll
still get defecated on both by the left
wing
and by the right and that's just the
yes or anything like that but it's just
a communist party USA the the the need
to disassociate and distance yourself
from the Communist Party or say and what
the CP USA was doing at that time in 30s
was leading the organizing of industrial
unionism leading the fight against
racism and Jim Crow segregation in the
south and and calling for peace and all
that sort of thing and and also
organizing popular fronts against
fascism so in fact the thing is the
Communists were doing were pretty good
things I'm reminded of what Dick Gregory
once said is why don't we why don't we
ever blame something bad on the
Communists you know when I hear about
civil right to say oh the Communists
behind that or I hear about peace and
and disarmament all the communists
behind that or the environment or the
Communists man
why don't we blame something bad on them
and yet there's so there was so much of
this kind of anti-communism that even
people of the caliber of Walter Reuther
had to get in and join in on it felt
obliged to do that and show he was as
firm and loyal and anti-communist as
anybody else one of the things while
playing into the hands of the day edgar
Hoover's and helping to create that very
same atmosphere of witch-hunting that
that gave Hoover his power over the
American public sure one of the things
that Walter Reuther had in common with
two black American leaders Martin Luther
King and Malcolm X is that in the period
of time leading up to all of their
deaths different periods of time in each
of their cases oh the agendas of each of
those men had been broadened from their
relatively narrow field of
specialization in Luther's case labor
activities obviously in the case of both
Martin Luther King and Malcolm X a black
civil rights they have been broadening
their agendas to an international agenda
and to uh seeing their respective
struggles as joined with and part of a
global struggle for social justice and
equality correct and a global struggle
against certain common enemies and it
was that coalescence
that I believe led to the death of
Malcolm X and Martin Luther King and
Walter Reuther Ruth is maybe less known
but he in a way he was he was one of the
more powerful and influential Republican
leaders said somebody like Barry
Goldwater for instance said that that
ruther was more dangerous than the
Soviet divisions you know I mean it was
always kind of a hysterical kind of
stuff Walter Reuther was more great a
menace and Soviet Russian might be able
but I don't think Soviet Russia without
greater Menace frankly other members of
Congress said he was he was dreaming of
establishing a socialist labor
government in the US and Luther by the
way did have a whole agenda on nutrition
on federally funded affordable housing
national health care government
ownership of monopolies industries
worker participation and economic
planning he had a various proposals for
redistributing power and wealth all of
which were taking his threat to the
ruling class and they certainly were
they were certain were very real threats
and I think that's why in May of 1970
the day after he sent a telegram to the
White House and shortly after he'd ran a
full-page ad in the major newspapers how
the US should get out of the Vietnam War
and and and and against US intervention
is in most places on may 1970 a rented
private plane that he had rented to go
off with two other leaders and and his
wife and and the two pilots all were
killed and evidence shows that the
altimeter of the plane which which
records the altitude the plane is flying
at the altimeter was was was had been
tampered with in about seven serious
ways and all sorts of things that were
wrong in it the rocking shaft and in
stone particular bolts whatever
in Japan all these things are either the
wrong size or installed backwards or put
in incorrectly or it would had been
loosened by by deliberate human effort
and the investigation showed that the
malfunctioning of the altimeter was the
cause of the of the crash the two pilots
were perfectly experienced they had
flown into this Airport before many
times under worse weather conditions and
and had had a lot of miles and they were
in perfect condition and they were well
rested before the trip the other thing
was that the runway was incorrectly lit
the only lighted approach lacked a
visual approach path which would allow
the plane to come in and the main runway
had a visual approach but the one of the
runway lights were had been knocked out
of last minute so the pilots went off to
the side runway and they came down and
they were probably about 200 feet off
because of the way this altimeter had
been tampered with so there's very very
real evidence the National National
Safety Transportation Board which looked
into this whole issue now I'm sorry
National Transportation Safety Board
found the this tampering and and then
ignored it on its own findings and came
to no conclusion as to what happened
they just said was a malfunctioning of
the altimeter and they never said what
what caused the ultimate of the
malfunction why would this altimeter
have all these defects the chances of
all that happening were were hard to buy
by sheer chance so hard to believe
in fact you point out that there was a
screw which was loose they were totally
we we should go recap perhaps for the
listeners there were a total of seven
different defects with the altimeter
which would have read high by 200 to 250
feet according to the investigators and
a screw had come loose and it was tested
to see if perhaps the heat of the fire
or the violence of the crash could have
jolted it loose and in fact that was not
the case right that's true and I should
also point out something else that was
very strange that is just a year before
Walter and Victor had been in a rather
similar crash going into Dulles in a
small private plane at that time though
the weather was clear enough that the
last-minute pilots were able to elevate
it and missed it whatever and and land
safely but it was a crash landing and
and everybody was banged up and hurt but
nobody seriously so and that was that -
that crash also I was a crash landing
with no casualties but that was also
caused by a defective altimeter however
the you point out that the pilots had
noticed us because they had adequate
visual means of assessing their height
so they were able to adjust for it right
as I just said and again but isn't it
odd that the same kind of accident with
the same kind of malfunctioning
altimeter what happened it should also
be pointed out that these private planes
are rented out and there have different
pilots maybe two or three or four in one
day
on the various trips and for that reason
because it is a rented plane the pilots
demand that the planes be inspected very
closely they're inspected very closely
much more so than ordinary commercial
airline and so what were the odds of
that altimeter being functioning so
poorly and going undetected
I believe it was tampered with just
before the trip on which Walter and his
wife went on their fatal voyage you
point out that Glen Campbell the famous
singer had taken that same plane on a
flight earlier that day with no incident
correct in Atlanta not just the same day
but the very flight just before luther's
and we were again for the audience there
were seven different defects with the
altimeter when the plane crash with
Walter Reuther yes and um
Victor Uther to this day and Elizabeth
Ruth Walter's daughter and most the
family now are convinced that the the
crash was not an accident it was
sabotage but the New York Times leaped
forward with an article saying that no
evidence of sabotage
Timothy was malfunctioning and that's
not true the report doesn't say anything
one way or the other whether there was
or wasn't sabotage and if you read the
actual report there's quite a bit of
evidence of sabotage even just a reading
of the report I mean
Peggy noton and I did did do we did some
original research we went through a lot
of FBI documents that proved almost
useless by the way all the documents FBI
documents relating to Walter Luther's
death was so heavily redacted but there
was nothing to read on them except the
little heading up the top ruther death
you know and date for something and one
or two other little half lines and then
not raising the question of course the
question is you know since here it is
26 years after his death and the FBI
still is what are they hiding in their
documents about Walter ruses death I
don't understand so we couldn't really
get much investigation on in those
documents but just reading the National
Transportation Safety Board's report and
the stuff in there is is is
mind-boggling as to what really happened
so we believe that Walter Reuther was
murdered and he was murdered by very
powerful people and interest the same
people who were killing I believe the
same people who were killing a lot of
other people we might may not be
directly but they don't directly
necessarily do the job themselves
there's a whole plausible denial there's
a whole use of surrogate forces you know
the CIA and FBI used black Muslims to
knock off Malcolm X and the and they use
they had to alpha teams ready to hit
Martin Luther King and instead they they
made sure a racist did it you know that
so they can get other people who are
instigated and financed and and and give
be given reassurances that they'll be
thoroughly covered and but you know
these things are you know these things
are you know something is going wrong
here when there's no investigation when
there's a history of suspicious actions
and when the person has these kinds of
powerful enemies we might want to know
too that the fatal crash and the
previous altimeter defect was on in
October of 68
Walter Reuther was killed on May 9 1970
the day after he sent a telegram to the
White House condemning the killings at
Kent State where students were
protesting Richard Nixon's invasion of
Cambodia that got Walter Reuther put
right at the top of Richard Nixon's
enemies list Michael we are all out of
time and once again I want to thank you
and your colleague Peggy Nodin for this
wonderful piece of investigative
reporting again the title of the article
for those who would like to hunt this
down this wonderful life and strange
death of Walter Reuther co-authored by
Michael Parenti and Peggy Noten
published in covert action quarterly
number 54 from the fall of 1995 right
thank you it was a pleasure bye-bye
bye-bye now
hello my name is Dave Emery and in this
segment we're going to begin a reading
of the article you heard described by
dr. Michael Parenti the article that he
co-authored with the colleague Peggy
not'n by the way Peggy Newton's last
name n ot o n this article is about the
life and death and probable
assassination of Walter Reuther the very
famous or at least famous to those of
familiar with American labor history
leader of the United Auto Workers Union
this article is entitled the wonderful
life and strange death of Walter Reuther
it was co-authored by dr. Michael
Parenti and Peggy Noten the article was
published in covert action quarterly
number 54 that is the issue of from the
fall of 1995 the first segment of the
article details Walter Reuther 's
travails during the course of his career
as a labor organizer it touches briefly
on the circumstances surrounding his
death and talks about two earlier
attempts on not only his life but the
life of his brother Victor the article
begins in recent decades organized labor
has endured a serious battering by
conservative interests in government and
the corporate world as progressives in
the afl-cio try to rally their forces
they would do well to remember those few
specially gifted union leaders who
understood the broader social and
political dimensions of the labor
struggle among such leaders looms the
great figure of Walter Reuther his life
and death contain lessons relevant to
today's struggle rising from the ranks
to spearhead the creation of the United
Auto Workers or UAW ruther brought a
special blend of unfaltering
progressivism and efficacy to the US
political scene for this he earned the
wrath of powerful corporate and
political interests on the evening of
May 9th 1970 with his wife to close UAW
associates and the planes two-man crew
were killed when their chartered Learjet
crashed near the Emmet County Airport in
northern Michigan the brief flight had
originated in Detroit and was coming in
through the mist on an instrument
landing when it plowed into the treetops
and burst into flames there were no
survivors
a year and a half earlier in October of
1968 Luther and his brother Victor had
barely escaped death and a remarkably
similar incident while flying into
Dulles Airport outside Washington DC
again in a small private plane on that
night the sky was clear enough for the
pilots to realize that their altimeter
was malfunctioning and at the last
moment they managed a crash landing that
smashed a wing of the plane but left no
one seriously injured years later Victor
ruther Walter's brother told us quote I
and other family members were convinced
that both the fatal crash and the
near-fatal one in 1968 were not
accidental unquote any number of highly
placed persons might have wanted Walter
Reuther out of the way indeed there is
evidence of foul play against him
through much of his public life and
evidence of sabotage in the fatal crash
itself the next segment of Parenti and
Nolan's article is entitled in the early
struggle and it reads eight months
before his death
Ruthy reflected quote the labor movement
is about changing society what good is a
dollar an hour more in wages if your
neighborhood is burning down what good
is another week's vacation if the lake
you used to go to where you've got a
cottage is polluted and you can't swim
in it and the kids can't play in it what
good is another 100 dollar pension if
the world goes up in atomic smoke Luther
was the kind of labor leader who most
discomforted the higher circles militant
incorruptible and dedicated to both the
rank-and-file and a broad class agenda
the son of a German immigrant who was a
lifelong socialist and labor organizer
ruther devoted his life to the labor
struggle in 1932 after being fired from
his job at a Ford plant because of his
unionizing efforts walter departed with
victor on a three-year trip around the
world
their itinerary included a prolonged
stint as workers in a ford plant in the
soviet union writing to a friend back in
the States
Luther described Soviet society in his
Soviet Society in enthusiastic terms the
letter which he signed Vic and wall
later was doctored in a number of places
most notably its closing comment carry
on the fight was changed to carry on the
fight for a Soviet America unquote the
FBI had the original letter written in
its internal files but circulated only
the Ford went to political leader
corporate heads and rival unionists in
an attempt to show that Walter was a
communist tool returning to Detroit in
late 1935 Walter and Victor emerged as
leaders in the often bloody struggle
against the automotive bosses winning
landmark victories against Chrysler GM
and Ford in May of 1937 during a major
leafletting effort Luther and dozens of
other UAW organizers were assaulted by
Ford's thugs testifying at a federal
hearing ruther described how he and his
companions were repeatedly punched
kicked and slammed against the concrete
floor then thrown down several flights
of stairs while the police stood by
doing nothing in April of 1938 two
masked gunmen forced their way into
Reuters Detroit home during a party and
attempted to abduct him while they were
trying to beat ruther into submission
one guest managed to flee in summon help
the assailants were eventually arrested
but their trial proved to be a sham
facing a jury packed with Ford
sympathizers the defense argued that
Walter had staged the whole event as a
publicity stunt the state prosecutor
neglected to mention that Reuters
organizing activities had made him a
target at Ford and that both of the
accused recently had been working for
Ford security chief Harry Bennett the
jury acquitted the two men no one could
claim that another attack a decade later
was staged in April of 1948 Luther was
nearly killed by a shotgun blast fired
through his kitchen window he suffered
chest and arm wounds and never recovered
the full use of his right arm and hand
an attempt on Victor aruthor's life the
following year suggests outright
complicity by law enforcement all from
the Detroit Police telling him that
neighbors whom the police refused to
name were complaining about his dog
barking in fact the dog had occasionally
barked at night when Victor would go out
to investigate he would see a parked car
start up and speed away after the police
issued a quote final warning unquote the
family reluctantly gave their pet to
some friends the very next evening
Luther was shot in the head as he sat
reading in his home the bullet tech out
took out his right eye and parts of his
jaw a neighbor who volunteered a
detailed description of the assailants
to the police was never contacted for
follow-up questioning and began
receiving anonymous
phone calls warning him to shut up and I
would note to in a footnote there
according to the victor ralph Winstead
spent eight years investigating the
ruther shootings for the United Auto
Workers in December of 1957 Winstead's
body was recovered from Lake st. Clair
his death was declared quote accidental
unquote and no investigation was made
continuing with the main text of the
article two days after Victor was shot
the US Senate unanimously adopted a
resolution requesting the FBI to
investigate both attacks US Attorney
General Tom Clark the governor of
Michigan and the UAW itself also
demanded an investigation although
Attorney General Clark FBI chief J edgar
Hoover's putative boss pointed to
possible violations of the fugitive
felon Act and several other federal
statutes Hoover refused to move claiming
a lack of jurisdiction because no
federal laws had been broken neither the
FBI nor the Detroit police followed up
on any of the leads uncovered by UAW
investigators nor did they come up with
any of their own no corporate officials
were ever questioned Ford strongman
harry bennett who had been implicated in
the 1938 attempt against walter was
never interrogated in fact Bennett was
Hoover's golfing buddy
and was considered a valuable ally who
gave the FBI access to his files on
quote communists unquote activity
consisting mostly of dossiers on labor
activists at the end of 1949 an attempt
to bomb UAW headquarters in Detroit was
filed by an anonymous call to a Detroit
Times reporter according to the caller
the explosive was quote planted when the
big guy Walter was in the building
unquote investigations conducted by the
police and the FBI produced not a clue
under reuters leadership the UAW not
only grew into the largest union in the
Western world with 1.2 million members
but it also became a powerful political
organization by 1952 as president of
both the UAW and the entire CIO ruther
had become in the words of one historian
quote the most influential labor figure
in the country unquote he used his
position to promote progressive stances
on a wide range of domestic and foreign
policy issues UAW locals around the
country
on political action committees that
lobbied lawmakers and helped elect
candidates friendly to organized labor
at the same time Walter and his brother
Roy were building allegiances between
labor church and civic groups and ethnic
minorities throughout the 1960s the UAW
lent financial and moral support to the
civil rights movement Luther worked
closely with Martin Luther King jr.
joining him in all the great civil
rights marches and serving as a longtime
member of the n-double a-c-p s board of
directors whose meetings the FBI
routinely bugged Luther sparked the
creation of a Citizens board of inquiry
into hunger and malnutrition the board's
findings that millions of Americans were
not getting enough to eat spurred
Congress into enacting reforms the UAW
leader pioneer of pioneered a variety of
innovative programs including employer
funded health and pension plans
cost-of-living allowances and a
guaranteed annual wage he fought for
federally funded affordable housing
nationalized health care government
ownership of monopolistic industries
worker participation and economic
planning and other proposals for
redistributing power and wealth all of
which were taken as threats to ruling
class interests as indeed they were
under water and Victor's leadership the
UAW became one of the strongest
proponents of the 1963 nuclear test ban
treaty UAW members marched in peace
demonstrations and voted funds to
support anti-war campaigns abroad
Reuther was the u.s. as best known and
best liked Labour leader in a number of
non-aligned countries in India he told
an appreciative audience that u.s.
foreign policy in Asia placed undue
emphasis on military power and quote
doubtful military allies unquote to the
neglect of quote reliable Democratic
friends unquote these activities earn
ruther powerful political enemies during
the 1956 presidential campaign vice
president Richard Nixon told Republican
stalwarts that the UAW leader not
Democratic presidential candidate Adlai
Stevenson was quote the man to beat
unquote because of his organizing power
and quote big-money unquote in 1958 at a
GOP fundraiser senator Barry Goldwater
declared that court Walter Reuther and
the UA
you CIO or a more dangerous Menace than
anything Soviet Russia might do to
America unquote other members of
Congress warned a Reuters quote dream of
establishing a socialist labor
government in the US unquote a double
page ad in The Wall Street Journal
echoed the same theme under an inch high
headline reading
will you let Walter Reuther get away
with it unquote they add warned quote
Walter Reuther is already within reach
of controlling near Congress the
American labor movement has now become a
political movement with the objective of
establishing a socialist labor
government in control of the economic
and social life of this nation unquote
for his activities at home and abroad as
Victor recalled quote the right-wing
never lost its violent bitter taste
against Walter nor did J Edgar Hoover
who stalked Reuter for some forty years
using undercover informants and illegal
bugging equipment Hoover successfully
blocked Reuters appointment to several
presidential boards and commissions by
secretly circulating disinformation
packets to the White House and members
of Congress
featuring the doctored quote for a
Soviet America letter and testimony by
individuals falsely accusing Walter of
communist affiliations during World War
two Hoover made preparations to put all
three ruther brothers in custodial
detention he was ultimately dissuaded
from doing so by John Bugis bu GA s
chief FBI agent in Detroit both the CIA
and the FBI monitored ruthless foreign
travel taking note of public comments of
his that quote might be construed as
contrary to the foreign policy of the
United States unquote in his early
Detroit days Walter had formed an
alliance with communists within the
Union in order to combat conservative
labor factions and company bosses in
1938 he severed this association and
some years later after gaining control
of the UAW Board he launched a purge of
dedicated UAW organizers who were
communists or are close to the party in
1949 he played a key role in the
expulsion of eleven cio unions accused
of being communist led over the years
luther denounced communism at every
opportunity
seeking to legitimate to legitimate his
own status as a loyal American but for
the industrialist financiers and leading
politico's
it made little difference whether their
wealth and power was challenged by quote
communist subversives unquote or quote
loyal Americans unquote it was not an
obsession with communism that caused
them to hate and fear ruther but an
obsession with maintaining the
privileged place in the political
economic status quo at the same time
Luther was critical of right-wing
radicalism in 1961 Attorney General
Robert Kennedy asked him Victor and
Joseph rau ra-yu H an attorney for the
UAW to investigate the wall the
ultra-right Walter was a close friend
and adviser to the Kennedys
the resulting report warned of radical
right elements inside the military and
urged the president to dismiss generals
and admirals who engaged in rightist
political activities the report also
faulted J Edgar Hoover for exaggerating
the domestic communist menace at every
turn unquote thus contributing quote to
the public's frame of mind upon which
the radical right feeds unquote from the
first days of the afl-cio merger in 1955
irreconcilable political differences
existed between ruther and afl-cio
president George Meany a cold war Hawk
under Meany the afl-cio had entered an
had entered an unholy alliance with the
CIA
in order to bolster conservative
anti-communist unions in other countries
these unions Victor ruther concluded
were run by people who were quote well
soaked with both US corporate and CIA
juices it was in effect an exercise in
trade union colonialism unquote in early
1968 the UAW withdrew from the afl-cio
and joined forces with the Teamsters and
two smaller unions to form the Alliance
for labor action or ala with a
membership totaling over four million
the Teamsters gave Luthor a free hand on
political and social issues with Nixon
in the White House and the bombings in
Indochina escalating to unprecedented
levels ruther ran ads in the national
media and appeared before congressional
committees to denounce the war and call
for drastic cuts in the military budget
while the afl-cio proclaimed its support
for Nixon's escalation of the war and
his anti-ballistic missile program the
ala lobbied hard against both Nixon's
invasion of Cambodia
and the killing of 4 Kent State students
prompted ruther the day before his death
to telegram the White House condemning
the war the invasion and quote the
bankruptcy of our policy of force and
violence in Vietnam unquote by 1970
Reuther was seen more than ever as a
threat to the dominant political agenda
earning him top place on Nixon's enemy
list the struggles of war truthers life
provide ample cause to give more than
cursory attention to the questionable
circumstances of his death first as
president of the largest union in the
country luther had the resources for
advancing his causes on the national
scene as did few others he was an
extraordinarily effective proponent of
socio-economic equality and an outspoken
critic of the military-industrial
complex the arms race the CIA the entire
national security state and the Vietnam
War for these stands he earned the
enmity of people in high places second
in the years before the fatal crash
there had been assassination attempts
against Walter and Victor Victor
believes the attempt against him was
intended as a message to Walter in each
of these instances state and federal law
enforcement agencies were at best laxa
day cycle in their investigative efforts
suggesting the possibility of official
collusion or at least tolerance for the
criminal deeds third like the suspicious
air crash a year and a half earlier the
fatal crash may also have involved have
involved a faulty altimeter in a small
plane it is a remarkable coincidence
that ruther would have been in two
planes with the exact same malfunction
in that brief time fourth and most
significantly the National
Transportation Safety Board
investigation of the fatal May 1970
crash turned up disturbing evidence
when investigators disassembled the
captain's altimeter they found no fewer
than seven abnormalities most
significantly investigators found a
brass screw lying loose in the altimeter
case although the report notes that with
a loosened screw quote the altimeter
would have read high by 225 to 250 feet
unquote the investigators did not say
who or what had loosened it they did
however manage to eliminate the crash
itself as the cause the screw quote
locks the movable aluminum calibration
arm in place when the instrument is
calibrated
the threads within the screw hole were
torn and ragged deposits of aluminum
particles were observed on the threads
of the screw testing to see if the heat
of the crash might have caused the screw
to come loose investigators placed a
similar calibration our mechanism in an
oven and heated it for two hours at
1,100 degrees Fahrenheit quote this
screw was found to be tight when
examined unquote when the test screw was
removed quote aluminum deposits were
found on its threads the hole from which
it was removed displayed torn and broken
threads similar to those of the accident
calibration arm unquote indicating that
the loose screw and Reuters plane had
been unscrewed and not forced loose by
the crash since the crash itself did not
cause the screw to come loose it must
have been removed or loosened by
deliberate human effort
further examination revealed six other
unusual defects in the altimeter one an
incorrect pivot was installed at the end
of a rocking in one end of a rocking
shaft an end stone was missing from the
opposite end of the rocking shaft a ring
jewel within the mechanism was installed
off-center a second rocking shaft rear
support pivot was incorrect the wrong
kind of link pin which holds a spring
clip in place at the pneumatic capsule
was installed an in stone which supports
a shaft within the mechanism was
installed upside down the odds that this
many abnormalities could accidentally or
coincidentally appear in a single
altimeter are extremely low with notable
understatement the investigators
concluded that quote such conditions
undoubtedly caused extensive friction in
the altimeter mechanism the Board
believes that while the evidence is not
conclusive
the captain's altimeter was probably
reading inaccurately unquote there were
other problems
the pilots chose the only lighted
approach runway 5 but it lacked both
runway and identifier lights and a
visual approach path indicator VAP is
give pilots their proper flight angle
and help determine altitude the main
approach runway 23 had a V API but one
of the runway lights was out that the
pilots were not notified of this fault
as his customary suggests that the light
broke near to landing time in its
opening synopsis the NTSB report
emphasized they quote
of visual cues unquote as a cause of the
accident but the synopsis is misleading
the body of the report noted that in the
absence of sufficient visual cues quote
use of the altimeter is a necessity
unquote and if the pilot was using the
altimeter to determine altitude during
the approach then quote lack of visual
cues for altitude determination must be
considered to have had little effect
unquote
however quote an altimeter which read
too high unquote could have caused the
pilot mistakenly to think he had
sufficient altitude for a safe landing
quote in view of the condition of the
captain's altimeter such a situation is
highly possible unquote aside from the
altimeter the report found no other
defects in the aircraft the Learjet
quote was properly certified
certificated and air worthy unquote and
quote there was no malfunction of the
aircraft prior to the accident
unquote nor was there evidence of crew
incapacity or error medical records and
post-mortem examinations of the pilot
and first officer found no evidence of
disease or physical disability and both
crew members had been free from flight
duties for approximately 24 hours prior
to the flight captain George Evans had
more than 2,000 hours of flight time on
Learjets
and more than 140 hours in the previous
three months and both pilots had flown
into the pelton airport many times under
far worse conditions an Associated Press
story carried in the New York Times
under the headline quote no sabotage
found in ruther crash unquote stated
that the NTSB quote said today that it
had found no indication of sabotage to
explain the jet air taxi crash unquote
the time story is seriously misleading
in fact the final NTSB report utters not
a word about sabotage one way or the
other it notes how numerous unusual
defects in the altimeter may have caused
a malfunction but it says nothing about
what caused the defects themselves
except to rule out crash heat as a
factor in disassembling the locking
screw the report never asks whether the
altimeter was tampered with
yet it prefers a good deal of evidence
to suggest that it was in effect the
investigators ignored their own findings
earlier on the day of the fatal crash
the same ill-fated Lear jet carrying
popular singer Glenn Campbell hit
flown into Detroit with no report of a
faulty altimeter Victor ruther noted
that there was sufficient time between
flights for tampering with the altimeter
he also pointed out that because there
have been some that because they have so
many clients in different pilots rental
planes are inspected with unusual care
and frequency the pilots demanded as
much it is unlikely that an altimeter
with seven defects would have gone
undetected if properly inspected before
the flight Victor added quote I was
never convinced that there had been a
thorough investigation by federal
authorities there had been too many
direct attempts on Walter's life and
there was too much evidence of tampering
with the rental plane unquote in a
follow-up interview Victor Routh Victor
ruther further noted quote animosity
from government had been present for
some time before the fatal crash it was
not only Walter stand on Vietnam and
Cambodia that angered Nixon but also I
had exposed some CIA elements inside
labor and this was also associated with
Walter overwater knew I was right
he felt that I had put him in an
impossible position he said quote your
take on taking on an agency that can
Forge any document to prove we are liars
unquote but I think he was glad to see
the information come out checking into
the vendetta is no easy task the FBI
still refuses to turn over nearly 200
pages of documents including the copious
correspondence between field offices and
Hoover regarding Reuters death and many
of the documents it is released are
totally inked out it is hard to fathom
what national security concern is
involved or why the FBI and CIA must
still keep so many secrets about Walter
Reuther Luther's death appears as part
of a truncation of liberal and radical
leadership that included the murders of
four other national figures President
John Kennedy Malcolm X Martin Luther
King jr. and Senator Robert Kennedy and
dozens of leaders in the Black Panther
Party and in various community
organizations where the Reuters death
was part of a broader agenda to
decapitate and demoralize the mass
movements of that day or whether such an
agenda existed at all are questions that
go beyond the scope of our inquiry but
Victor's belief shared by Walters
daughter daughter Elizabeth ruther dick
Meyer and other members of the family
that the crash was no accident
does not seem implausible despite the
limited investigation there is enough
evidence to suggest that foul play was
involved the death of this dedicated and
effective progressive labor leader
raises disquieting questions about the
criminal nature of state power in what
purports to be a democracy
I've been reading an article by dr.
Michael Parenti and his colleague Peggy
notun entitled the wonderful life and
strange death of Walter Reuther this is
from covert action Quarterly's issue
number fifty-four from the fall of 1995
listeners who would like to contact
covert action can do so at the following
address
covert action quarterly is located at
1500 Massachusetts Avenue Northwest
rooms 7:30 to Washington DC - zero zero
zero five once again the address for
covert action quarterly 1,500
Massachusetts Avenue Northwest Room 7:30
to Washington DC - zero zero zero five
listeners who would like to contact me
by email I now can do so now I now have
an email address the email address to
contact me at all lowercase letters D
Emery de mo ry at well wel l dot c om
once again my email address D Emery de
mo ry at well dot-com listeners would
like to correspond with me should do so
at the following address so that is B
listeners would like to use snail mail
on a quote right to my attention my last
name is e mo ry at care of I should say
k FJ c FM kangaroo Fred John Charles FM
one two three four five that's one two
three four five El Monte Road capital L
capital mo NT e Road that's in Los Altos
Hills zip code nine four zero two two
once again right to my attention and my
last name amo ry care of k FJ CFM
one two three four five El Monte rode
capital L capital mo n te Road that's in
Los Altos Hills nine four zero two two
of course that's in California very
shortly I will have a new address for
people to contact would regard to they
half-hour segments the this is not the
address to which people should write for
the archived shows but rather very soon
I will have a new address for the
half-hour segments those are now going
to be distributed by someone other than
archives on audio so please stay tuned
for that that concludes a segment my
name is Dave Emery thanks for listening